Lecture 6 Notes: L5.T3

Supreme Court Death penalty example - suppressed premises
True premise + conclusion - not sufficient for validity. Even with suppresed premises (not calling it missing), validity is not guaranteed.

Principle of Charity: Give the best possible defence to the presented argument. Supply linking premises. Whether the conditional premise makes sense or not, relevance: "If my name is Sayar, then the Sun is a star"

Reconstruct the argument - ignore rhetorical and irrelevant details. Leaving out certain details might be a unfaithful reconstruction of the argument.

Argument analysis: Dissecting the argument - Clarify crucial terms as well

Whether the claims are true or not. Acceptability of premises. Descriptive and normative truths.

Weakness: Different forms - would not accept as true - it is raining outside: Try to say something is not 'unusual' or 'cruel' - not right way here - referring to pieces, evidence, acceptance on some kind of epistemic grounds

Stich and Donaldson: Briefly about the textbook
Existence of God.
Leonardo Dicaprio God meme. Aquinas' First cause argument. Concept of God. How is it different from a unicorn? God's have certain powers - myths - Not really. See God as a set of characteristics.

4 arguments: Cosmological, Design, Ontological - for the proof of God. Aquinas starts by replying to the ontological argument. Slowly and in-depth.

5 ways... 2nd Approach - Aquinas: Terminology from Aristotle: Book called Metaphysics: Potentiality versus Actuality. Socrates obsessed about definitions - makes use of examples left and right.

Facts about change. Something needs to bring about a change. Drawing something from potentiality to actuality. Analyze the first 2 ways in detail. Construction. 1st way talks about an unmoved mover.

Does potentiality and actuality need to be understood diachronically? Aquinas versus a priest - How do we reason out that a God exists?

Objection: Certain changes where things are moved into being F. Some F may be quite absurd such as stupidity. Premise 3. Parents persuade one to become an engineer. In objections, considering "God is reasonable" may not be well-supported. Trying to make the set of 'considered  properties of God' an inconsistent set.

2nd Way: Uncaused Cause. No proof for mono-theism. Multiple uncaused causes might be in place. Rooting an understanding of God - pre-theoretic properties: Prime mover would be a property. Validity of Aquinas' argument...