Lecture 13 Notes:

See L12 Slides

We're trying to understand the notion of causation - Causal dependence is sufficient but not necessary - Come to the concept of preemption

Concept and Notion - Understand something abstract, the intuition and a set of formal theorems, lemmas. In philosophy, we distinguish between concept and notion.

Physically necessary truths and Logically necessary truths: Now we analyze the notion of causation itself. Detour into Aristotelian Causes.

Lewis and the counterfactual theory. Causal and counterfactual dependence - an analysis of the notion causation.

Analyzing arguments: validity and soundness. How about analyzing notion?: the conditions for notion: necessary and sufficient. Causal dependence: why is it sufficient but not necessary?

Example: Defining luck. Whether the definition is good. Just a notion of luck is being given. How will you analyze this notion of luck?: iff the occurence of that event is beyond the individual's control.

> Strategies for analyzing the definition: Study the usual cases where the word luck is typically used. "Lucky Draw". Randomness of something related to luck.

Touching up on the concept of causal dependence. Look at the logical form of definition. Only what is being said in the sentence. - Is a storm on Jupiter lucky for an individual? NO. But it is beyond the individual's control and it's occurence. So this would be a counter-example to our definition. - The definition is actually necessary but not sufficient. OR consider the person meets an accident: meets the conditions, but is clearly not lucky for the individual.

Add more conditions:
1. Relevant to the individual
2. Results in a sufficiently large positive reward for the individual

Causal Dependence is sufficient but not necessary: Preemption. A, B plan to kill C and take aim. A fires. B sees A firing and does not fire. B's action merely preempts potential cause. Preemptive action. But both A's and B's actions are on par from point of view of causal dependence.

Effect: C's death. On which event is that counterfactually dependent on.
If A did not pull the trigger, B would. If no one pulled the trigger, then C would not have died*. A was the one who caused the death. That is the immediate causal claim. A's action preempted B's action.

Say both A and B were arrested. Jury: Punish A for murder, Punish B for conspiracy. Causal dependence: Keeps A and B on par.

> Causal Transitivity: causal chain e_1 → e_2 → e_3 → ... → e_N
Taking care of preemption: there is an actual chain from event A to C's death but no chain from event B to C's death - step-wise (counterfactual) dependencies traced back from event to cause event.

A and B throw rock at a glass window. B's throw breaks it. A's throw passes through. Alternative causal chain cut short by the main causal chain. Trace a counterfactual dependence back from shattering of glass window to B's throw. What about tracing back to A's throw? - Same as previous case. A's throw would have been the cause but it ended up not being the cause.

On Hume's thoughts: evidence based on which we make claims... Move on to the experimental results for effectiveness of a drug. Randomized control trial. > COVID-19 Case fatality rate grouped based on age demographics.

> Cholesterol and exercise.

Simpson's paradox, Necessary analysis. Prior Probabilities.
Next Event: Discussion Session for Short Essay Topics - Emphasis on topics in Yellow and Red.