Lecture 7 Notes:
See L6 Slides

Stich and Donaldson - Analyzing the first cause argument for existence of God - Countable and Uncountable Infinity - Infiniteness is possible - Is it possible in the physical sense?: Physics argument - Atoms can neither be created, nor be destroyed - Space Time extends infinitely - Touch up on the Big Bang

Circular Causal Chains - what about those? If we deny first cause, there has to be a a first cause or an infinite chain. Causation: A causes B. So does A need to happen before B? Yes if we assume time is linear - Examples from Quantum Mechanics: causal explanations. Chains about beliefs... infinitism - justifications don't stop anywhere, no foundations - or maybe a notion of coherence, web of beliefs converge

Russell: Can give causal explanations, not a first cause. "Cause of COVID: X, Cause of X?"

Point about the Bootstrap paradox. No need to explain God, or give a cause. Then also, no need to give a cause for the Big Bang.

Overdetermination & Preemption: Causal overdetermination - collider structure. X causes Y. (If X did not happen, Y will not happen)!. Look for specific domains where a causation analysis structure might not work e.g quantum mechanics.

Pre-emption: Had A not happened, B would not have happened. Which is false.
Assumption: Every event necessarily has a certain cause. Overdetermination & Pre-emption is a means to challenge the definition structure of causation.

Assuming that the causation automata (graph) is purely deterministic.

Possibility, Necessity - concept of gradation. Governance: the governer causing things requires consciousness and intelligence - make a much stronger argument on part of Aquinas.

Leibniz Sufficient Reason Argument: No matter how much we backtrack, we won't have a concrete foundation - Monadology. Difference between reason and cause. Aquinas says God pushed the first Domino. Leibniz does not believe in the Domino effect. Prior Contingents leading to next things... the one at the root is God

Deductive Reasoning to arrive at Truths. Sufficient reason as to why it is so and not otherwise.

Principle of Sufficient Reason: why is F the case? For all X, there is a Y s.t Y is sufficient reason for X. Reason as a premise, truth and falsity. Reasons may not necessarily be causes. Causes are reasons that something happen. Contingent truths require explanations, necessary truths don't.

Leibniz: Metaphysical explanation. What grounds a causal change? How do you ground moral truths? Atomic facts or atomic physical properties for grounding. Why is there a world at all?: Formulations. Aim to show that God is a necessary being. - Cosmological argument that God is necessary

Design argument: revolves around the theory of evolution
